## 8.1 Creating Your Shell Environment
### Quyidagi gaplarni o'qing va tushunishga harakat qiling

You can tune your shell to help you work more efficiently. You can set aliases to create
shortcuts to your favorite command lines and environment variables to store bits of infor-
mation. By adding those settings to shell configuration files, you can have the settings
available every time you open a shell.

Several configuration files support how your shell behaves. Some of the files are executed
for every user and every shell, whereas others are specific to the user who creates the con-
figuration file

To change the `/etc/profile` or `/etc/bashrc` files, you must be the root user. It is better
to create an `/etc/profile.d/custom.sh` file to add system-wide settings instead of

**Bash Configuration Files**

`/etc/profile` 
- This sets up user environment information for every user. It is executed when you first log in.
- This file provides values for your path in addition
to setting environment variables for such things as the location of your mailbox and the size of your history files.
- Finally, `/etc/profile` gathers shell settings from configuration files in the `/etc/profile.d` directory

`/etc/bashrc`
- This executes for every user who runs the bash shell each time a bash shell is opened. 
- It sets the default prompt and may add one or more
aliases. Values in this file can be overridden by information in each user’s `~/.bashrc file`.

`~/.bash_profile`
- This is used by each user to enter information that is specific to his or her use of the shell. 
- It is executed only once—when the user logs in.
- By default, it sets a few environment variables and executes the user’s `.bashrc` file.
- This is a good place to add environment variables because,
once set, they are inherited by future shells.

`~/.bashrc`
- This contains the information that is specific to your bash shells.
- It is read when you log in and also each time you open a new bash shell. 
- This is the best location to add aliases so that your shell picks them up.

`~/.bash_logout`
- This executes each time you log out (exit the last bash shell).


Editing those files directly, however. Users can change the information in the `$HOME/.bash_profile`, `$HOME/.bashrc`, and `$HOME/.bash_logout` files in their own home
directories.

To have the new information you just added to the file available from the current shell, type the
following:
`source $HOME/.bashrc`