### Quyidagi gaplarni o'qing va tushunishga harakat qiling

To save you a few keystrokes, the bash shell offers several **different** ways of completing
partially typed values. To attempt to complete a value, type the first few characters and
press **Tab**. Here are some of the values you can type partially from a bash shell:

- **Command, alias, or function** 
  - If the text you type begins with regular characters, the shell tries to complete the text with a command, alias, or function name.
- **Variable** 
  - If the text you type begins with a dollar sign `($)`, the shell completes the text with a variable from the current shell.
- **Username** 
  - If the text you type begins with a tilde `(~)`, the shell completes the text with a username. As a result, `~username` indicates the home directory of the named user.
- **Hostname** 
  - If the text you type begins with the at symbol (`@`), the shell completes the
text with a hostname taken from the `/etc/hosts` file.

Quyidagi buyruqlarni yozib orqasidan `Tab` ni bosing
```shell
echo $OS<Tab>
cd ~ro<Tab>
userm<Tab>
```

Yuqoridagi buyruqlar haqida ma'lumot bering


### Quyidagi gaplarni o'qing va tushunishga harakat qiling

Pressing **Tab twice** offers some wonderful possibilities. Sometimes, several possible completions for the string of characters you have entered are available. In those cases, you can check the possible ways that text can be expanded by pressing Tab twice at the point where you want to do completion.
The following shows the result you would get if you checked for possible completions on `$P`:

```shell
echo $P<Tab><Tab>
$PATH $PPID $PS1 $PS2 $PS4 $PWD
echo $P
```