### Quyidagi gaplarni o'qing va tushunishga harakat qiling
## 4.1 Connecting and Expanding Commands
A truly powerful feature of the shell is the capability to redirect the input and output of commands to and from other commands and files. To allow commands to be string together, the shell uses metacharacters. 

A metacharacter is a typed character that has special meaning to the shell for connecting commands or requesting expansion.
Metacharacters include 
- the pipe character `(|)`, 
- ampersand `(&)`, 
- semicolon `(;)`, 
- right parenthesis `())`, 
- left parenthesis `(()`, 
- less than sign `(<)`, 
- greater than sign `(>)`



## 4.2 Piping between commands

### Quyidagi gaplarni o'qing va tushunishga harakat qiling

The **pipe** `(|)` metacharacter connects the output from one command to the input of another command. This lets you have one command work on some data and then have the next command deal with the results. 

`cat /etc/passwd | sort | less` - qanday hodisa yuz berayotganini tushuntirib bering

### Quyidagi gaplarni o'qing va tushunishga harakat qiling

Pipes are an excellent illustration of how UNIX, the predecessor of Linux, was created as an operating system made up of building blocks. A standard practice in UNIX was to connect utilities in different ways to get different jobs done. For example, before the days of graphical word processors, users created plain-text files that included macros to indicate formatting

`echo $USER > demo.txt | cat demo.txt` - qanday hodisa yuz berayotganini tushuntirib bering

## 4.3 Sequential commands

### Quyidagi gaplarni o'qing va tushunishga harakat qiling

Sometimes, you may want a sequence of commands to run, with one command completing before the next command begins. 
You can do this by typing several commands on the same command line and separating them with semicolons `(;)`

`date; ping -c 2 telegram.com; date` - qanday hodisa yuz berayotganini tushuntirib bering

## 4.4 Background commands

### Quyidagi gaplarni o'qing va tushunishga harakat qiling

Some commands can take a while to complete. Sometimes, you may not want to tie up your shell waiting for a command to finish. In those cases, you can have the commands run in the background by using the **ampersand** `(&)`.

`ping -c5 iqro.itechcompany.uz >output.log 2>&1 &`